+++
title = "The REFORMER artificial intelligence platform"
date = 2020-08-31
template = "post.html"
draft = true

[taxonomies]
categories = ["ai"]

[extra]
author = "Baxter Eaves"
subheading = "An aware, introspective platform"
# image = "geology-01.jpg"
image = "mountain-2.jpg"
theme = "light-transparent"
front_page = false
+++

*Reformer* is Redpoll's *Humanistic* Artificial Intelligence platform. In this
post we discuss Reformer's capabilities at a high level by charting the
creation and propagation for information through the system.

Each subsection will explain a unique aspect of how Reformer behaves compared
to traditional AI. Subsections begin with a high-level explanation of the
behavior itself followed by more in-depth comparison with existing technology.

# The Reformer architecture

At the center of Reformer is a [Humanistic Artificial
Intelligence](@/blog/humanistic-ai.md) engine. Humanistic AI, in short, is an
AI system that provably mimics human cognitive capabilities and knowledge
structure. AI that works at the level of cognition interacts better with
people. Humanistic capabilities gives the Reformer core other capabilities that
make it safer, more flexible, and able to deliver information faster than other
systems.

1. Data (any format, complete or not) stream to the core inference engine by
   way of a data pipeline.
2. The always-on inference engine integrates the provide data into its knowledge
    + At this point, the engine may decide that the data represent an anomaly or an
        attack, and should be rejected and rerouted.
3. Information generated by the core inference engine is immediately "live" and
   available to all end-users via dashboards, deployed models, interactive
   clients, etc
4. The model continues to think and to introspect allowing it to discover
   subtle, potentially impact fool, knowledge

## Fewer data restrictions

Reformer places few restrictions on the form or presence of data. Continuous values, like the height and weight of a patient; categorical values, like the model of a car; cyclic values, like the month of the year or position on the globe; or most any other type of value is compatible with reformer with zero pre-processing (which biases your model) from the user. Whereas traditional machine learning requires data tables to be completely occupied, Reformer is happy to accept missing data.

### In depth

#### Modern machine learning requires continuous-valued data

#### Modern machine learning requires present data


## Streaming data

The data at any active organization is a stream. If your organization is not
generating data, it cannot generate information. If your organization is not
generating information, it cannot solve new problems. To enable continuous
information delivery and continuous innovation, an AI system must thrive in a
streaming data environment. Reformer is able to integrate new data, edit
existing data, and fill in missing entries without retraining.

Today's AI must be retrained whenever the data change. A change in the data
could be editing and existing data point, filling in missing entries, or adding
new data. This is catastrophic wasteful, especially with todays big complex
models, which could often take weeks or more and thousands of dollars to
retrain. If your model takes a week to train, your best case scenario ensures
your knowledge is always a week old. Image all the things that can go wrong in
a week. Entire wars have run their course in less time.

Assuming you get new data every day, the best case scenario also ensure that
you are training a model for ever day it takes to train a model. If your model
takes 7 days to train, you will always be training 7 models. On a mid-tier GPU
hardware through Amazon Web Services, this will cost around $33,600 per month.
If you want only weekly updates you can get away with training 1 at a time, but
your information will be nearly two weeks out of date.

## Always-on inference (mulling it over)

Today's Neural AI architecture *learns* by algorithms that search for a
performance peak. Imagine a blindfolded mountain climber dropped at some random
location in the Himalayas looking to summit Mt. Everest using the following
rule: *Always go up, never go down*. The climber will summit a peak, but it is
unlikely to be the highest.

Reformer explores. Reformer has a different goal: to chart the mountain range.
To this end, Reformer sends out armies of cartographer-climbers. The peaks are
easy to find. But what is beyond, hidden on far side? Like us, Reformer
considers its observations. And like us, it can be enlightened by exploring odd
ideas. So, Reformer never sleeps. It mulls things over when it is not handing
new inputs, Because we do not want to miss out on these *Eureka!* moments.

Perhaps Reformer finds that it has difficulty predicting under certain
conditions, but through further consideration discovers that those things that
that are difficult to classify are not odd examples of existing classes of
object, but comprise their own novel class of object? Where existing learning
algorithms give you what they give you, Reformer uses its free cycles to explore
new possibilities to discover subtle, but potentially impactful, knowledge.

## Intuitive information structure

The learning goal of Reformer is not to minimize the error of a specific
prediction; it is to minimize the information in the world (as defined by the
data stream). Like a person, its goal is never to be surprised. Reformer
attempts to recreate a model of the process that generated the data set.

Reformer represents its knowledge in a general, intuitive structure. It makes
very few assumptions about the data. It learns which data features are related
to which others and characterizes the form of that relationship.

## Introspection and self-awareness

Having access to an intuitive representation of knowledge allows Reformer to
make intuitive judgments about the state of its knowledge, and to share those
judgments with its users. Reformer can characterize and quantify its
uncertainty, identify anomalous data before they corrupt a system, and
attribute longer-term changes in it knowledge brought about by changes in the
data-generating process. Reformer generates information about information. This
means that if something happens that changes how or why your deployed models
perform, Reformer will let you know.

Reformer can:
- Tell you when it is likely to fail or succeed
- Tell you what experiments to run or data to collect to fill knowledge gaps
- Tell you which data are likely errors or attacks
- Tell you when and how the world (the data generating process) changes

And not only can Reformer tell you these things, it can tell you why.
